---
layout: post
title: "Day 5 - December 8, 2025"
date: 2025-12-07
---

8 December 2025, 9:30-10:00

Took notes on Data Types and Conditionals

## Data Types and Conditions

([source](https://www.theodinproject.com/lessons/foundations-data-types-and-conditionals))

## Introduction

A value in JavaScript is always of a certain type, for example a string or a number.

When using the `let` keyword we can put any type in a variable and can change it at different times. Programming languages that contain data types but do not bind value types to certain data types are called "dynamically typed"

```js
let message = "hello"
message = 123456;
```

## Data Types

([source](https://javascript.info/types) )

### Number

The number type represents integers and floating point numbers.

Numbers have many operations, such as multiplication`*`, division `/`, addition `+`, and subtraction `-`

Besides regular numbers there are also "special numeric values:"

- `Infinity` represents mathematical infinity ∞. It's a special value that's great than any number. Diving by zero will return Infinity, it can also be referenced directly

```js
alert( 1 / 0 ); // Infinity
alert( Infinity ); // Infinity
```

- `NaN` represents a computational error. It is the result of an incorrect or undefined mathematical equation.

```js
alert("not a number" / 2 ); //Nan
```

- `Nan` is sticky, if there is `NaN` somewhere in a mathematical expression it propagates to the entire result with one exception, `Nan ** 0` is 1.

> Math is "safe" in JS and the script will never stop with a fatal error ("die") at worst it will just return `Nan`

### BigInt

In JavaScript the `number` type can only safely represent integer values  smaller than (2^53-1) (9,007,199,254,740,991) and greater than -(2^53-1)

Technically, the `number` type can store larger integers (up to 1.7976931348623157 * 10^308) but outside of safe integer range (±(2^53-1)) there will be a precision error because digits at that level exceed the scope of 64-bit storage.

```js
console.log(9007199254740991 + 1); // 9007199254740992
console.log(9007199254740991 + 2); // 9007199254740992
```

All odd integers greater than (2^53-1) can't be stored in the `number` type. Normally this is fine but when dealing with cryptography or microsecond-precision timestamps those larger numbers are required and we reach for the `BigInt` type

A `BigInt` value is created by appending `n` to the end of an integer:

```js
// the "n" at the end means it's a BigInt
const bigInt = 1234567890123456789012345678901234567890n;
```

### String

A `string` in JavaScript must be surrounded by quotes:

```js
let str = "hello";
let str2 = 'single quotes are okay too';
let phrase = 'can embed another ${str}';
```

In JavaScript there are 3 types of quotes:

- Double quotes: `"Hello"`.
- Single Quotes: `'Hello'`
- Backticks:`` `Hello ` ``

Double and single quotes are "simple" quotes and there is essentially no difference between them.

Backticks are for extended functionality. They allow us to embed variables and expressions into a string by wrapping them in `${..}`

```js
let name = "John";

// embed a variable
alert( `Hello, ${name}!` ); // Hello, John!

//embed an expression
alert( `the result is ${1 + 2}` ): // the result is 3
```

The expression inside `${...}` is evaluated and the result becomes part of the string. We can put anything in there: a variable, an arithmetical expression, or something more complex.

Note: this is only possible with backticks, simple quotes will just return the actual characters `~$ {..}`
