---
layout: post
title: "Day 6 - December 9, 2025"
date: 2025-12-09
---

9 December 2025, 22:30-

Finished Data Types notes

### `true/false` (Boolean)

The boolean type has only two values: `true` and `false`.

This type is commonly used to store yes/no values: `true` means yes and `false` means no, for example:

```js
let nameFieldChecked = true;
let ageFieldChecked = false;
```

Boolean values also come as a result of comparisons:

```js
let isGreater = 4 >1;
alert( isGreater ); //true
```

### `null`

The `null` value is special and forms a separate type of its own which only contains the `null` value:

```js
let count = null;
```

In JavaScript, `null` represents nothing, empty, or value unknown.

### `undefined`

The `undefined` value represents "value not assigned"

If a variable is declared but not assigned then its value is `undefined`

```js
let count;

alert(count); // "undefined"
```

It is possible to assign `undefined` to a variable

```js
let count = 100;

// change the value to undefined
count = undefined;

alert (age); // "undefined"
```

### `symbol`

Symbols are used to create unique identifiers for objects.

### `object`

Objects are used to store keyed collections of various data and more complex entities.

```js
let user = {
  name: "John",
  age: 30,
}
```

### `typeof` operator

The `typeof` operator returns a string with the name of the type of the operand. This can be useful when we want to process values of different types differently or perform a quick check

```js
typeof undefined // "undefined"

typeof 0 // "number"

typeof 10n // "bigint"

typeof true // "boolean"

typeof "foo" // "string"

typeof Symbol("id") // "symbol"

// tricky
typeof Math // "object"

typeof null // "object"

typeof alert // "function"
```

1. Math is an object built-in to JavaScript.
2. This is a well-known JavaScript bug from the early days. It was not addressed as to not break compatibility. `null` is not an object, it is a separate type of its own.
3. `alert` is a function but functions belong to the `object` type. Technically this is also a JavaScript bug.

While the `typeof x` syntax is more common some people use `typeof(x)` but they both perform the same.
